Part1

1. Find the Laplace representations of the outputs θ(t) and x˙(t) in terms of both voltage input V and
disturbance d.
2. Analyze the stability of the outputs found in the previous step.
3. Since the sensors on the vehicle can measure only θ and ˙θ, the state x˙ is not available. Without using x˙
in the control design, construct a controller using θ,
˙θ and integral of θ for stabilizing the output θ(t)
around the vertical (i.e., you are designing a PID controller). This PID controller regulates the voltage
inputs to the motor. Using Routh’s array, find a set of controller gains kp, kI and kD with which θ(t) is
asymptotically stable.
4. With the PID gains found in Step 3, show whether or not x˙ is stable.
5. Using Root Locus analysis, tune either one of the PID controller gains in Step 3, such that system’s
settling time is reduced as determined by dominant poles.
6. Simulate the time domain behavior of θ(t) and x˙(t) with the implemented PID controller at Step 3 and
assuming the following conditions separately hold: (i) the disturbance is a unit impulse, (ii) the rider
leans forward and keeps a constant disturbance d.
7. Assume that the motor can deliver only ∓15 Volts. Connect a ‘saturation block’ to the output of your
controller in your simulation and compare Segway’s responses with those in Step 6. Use the PID design
from Step 3 for this analysis.



Part2:
1. Instead of using a PID controller, propose a customized high-order compensator with gain K in order
to stabilize θ(t) of the Segway vehicle (this compensator will have at least two stable poles). Show,
using Root Locus and Matlab simulations, that the designed compensator stabilizes the system. You do
NOT need to use angle deficiency to design the compensator but you can follow a qualitative approach
and place the compensator poles/zeros to move the root locus to the stable left-half plane. Pole/zero
cancellation is NOT allowed.
2. Write the governing dynamics in state space form z˙(t) = Az(t)+Bu(t)+T, where z(t) = (θ, ˙θ, x˙)
> is the state vector, A and B are state and control matrices, respectively, u is the controller (which contains
the voltage supplied from the motor) and T is the vector containing the disturbance torque mgd/J.
Assuming no disturbance and no controller input, analyze the system’s stability.
3. Using Matlab, show whether or not the system is controllable and/or observable.
4. Disregarding the disturbance, use Matlab to transform the state-space representation into control canonical form and modal canonical form.
5. We next aim to stabilize the system by designing a controller that calculates the voltage V based on
full-state feedback (all states are measurable). Disregarding the disturbance, use the ACKER command
in Matlab to design a control law K such that V = −Kz(t) places the closed loop poles at some desired
positions determined by the control designer (student picks the poles).
6. With the control law K from the previous step, and considering the rider’s disturbance (impulse and/or
step), simulate the states. Discuss the results in connection with the results obtained in Part 1 of the
project where only θ was available for the controller
